# Friction

The contact resistance to motion

## Overview
- Draw free body diagrams for objects subjected to friction forces.
- Tell the difference between static friction and kinetic friction.
- Apply the equation for static friction force `$F_{s} = \mu_{s} \cdot R_{N}$`.
- Apply the equation for kinetic friction force `$F_{k} = \mu_{k} \cdot R_{N}$`.

## Dry Friction

Friction may be defined as the contact resistance exerted by one body upon a second body when the second body slides or tends to slide 
past the first body.

Friction is a retarding force that always acts opposite to the motion or the tendency to move.

Dry friction happens when unlubricated surfaces of two solids are in contact and sliding.

### Magnitude of Friction

Friction's magnitude is dependent on two things:
1. The nature of the surfaces in contact (rough surfaces have more friction than smooth surfaces).
2. The normal force pressing the two surfaces together (the more force, the more friction).

### Nature of Surfaces in Contact

- The nature of the surfaces in contact that affects the amount of frictional force between them is represented by values called 
coefficient of friction `$\mu$`.
- There is a friction coefficent between every pair of surfaces in contact.
- The frictoin coefficent may be different when surfaces are in motion than when they are at rest.
    - In rest, the value is called the *static friction coefficent*, `$\mu_{s}$`.
    - In motion, the value is called the *kinetic friction coefficent*, `$\mu_{k}$`.

The coefficients do NOT have any units.

## Static Friction vs Kinetic Friction

@Row {
    @Column {
        When the object is stationary:

        ```math
        F_{f} < \mu_{s} \cdot R_{N}
        ```
    }

    @Column {
        When the object is stationary but about to move (impending motion):

        ```math
        F_{f} = \mu_{s} \cdot R_{N}
        ```
    }

    @Column {
        When the object is in motion:

        ```math
        F_{f} = \mu_{k} \cdot R_{N}
        ```
    }
}

Where `$R_{N}$` is the normal force acting on the object.

## Friction in a Free Body Diagram

In stationary objects, the direction of the frictional force opposes the tendency to move or impending motion of the object.

If the resultant force of the object parallel to the surface is in the positive direction, then the frictional force will be in the 
negative direction.

If the object does not move, the frictional force will be equal to the resultant force parallel to the surface.