# Newton's First Law

Newton's First Law, and a bit more on how it applies to friction

## Overview

- Distinguish between conditions of static equilibrium, dynamic equilibrium and acceleration.
- Draw free body diagrams for a particle in equilibrium.
- Apply the equations of equilibrium for a particle to solve static and dynamic equilibrium 
problems in engineering mechanics.

See <doc:Dynamics#Newton's-First-Law> for some starter information.

> Definition: Newton's First Law: An object either remain at rest or move with constant velocity 
as long as the net force acting on it is zero.

Basically it states that if nothing is moving/accelerating, the net translational forces are 0.

Static equilibrium is when the object is at rest, and dynamic equilibrium is when the object is 
moving with constant velocity. _Technically_ they're both the same thing because Einstein, but 
because with engineering we deal with the air and ground, we treat them as different.

## Particle Related Problem

An object can be represented as a particle when all forces acting on it have lines of action that
pass through a single point (the point does not need to be anything special, or even on the 
object).

These forces are known as concurrent forces. Note that because all forces act on the point, there
are no moments since `$\perp d$` is always zero.

## Equilibrium of Concurrent Forces

For a particle related problem, it is in equilibrium when:
- `$\sum F_x = 0$`
- `$\sum F_y = 0$`
- `$\sum M = 0$` (note: this is a precondition for a particle related problem)

In non-particle related problems, it follows the same rules. Moments apply in non-particle related
problems, so you should make sure that `$\sum M = 0$` still holds.

## Finding the Normal On a Slope

The rules for <doc:5.3-Friction> define the friction in terms of the normal force exerted by the
ground on the object. This is best done by redefining a coordinate system `$x', y'$`aligned to the 
slope, then using trig to find the weight's `$y'$` component. The normal contact force is equal to 
that, but in the opposite direction.

@Image(source: "Diagram_Slope Friction", alt: "Diagram of friction on a slope")

In the example above, we calculate the normal force to be
```math
W_{y'} = W \cdot \cos(\theta)
R_{N} = -W_{y'}
```
where 
- `$W_{y'}$` is the `$y'$` component of the object's weight, exerted on the slope
- `$R_{N}$` is the normal force exerted by the slope on the object
- `$W$` is the weight of the object in newtons
- `$\theta$` is the angle of the slope.

## Impending Motion

When an object is on the verge of moving but is not yet moving, it is said to be in impending 
motion. An object in impending motion is STILL in equilibrium, but if the target force were to be
increased slightly, it would start moving.

Usuaully this is used when there is friction involved, and the force opposing the motion is equal 
to the maximum force of friction (ie. `$F = F_{friction}$`). This means that if the force 
increases, it will overcome the friction and start moving.

Note that the friction is in the OPPOSITE direction of impending motion. A string may need to pull 
at tension `$T_{1}$` to keep an object from sliding down a slope, but needs to pull at 
`$T_{2}$` where `$T_{2} > T_{1}$` to start to move it up the slope. MAKE SURE that you treat 
friction as the correct direction.