# Equilibrium of a Rigid Body

Newton's first law for non-particle problems

## Overview

- Distinguish between equilibrium of a particle and equilibrium of a rigid body.
- Draw free body diagrams of rigid bodies in equilibrium.
- Apply the equations of equilibrium for a rigid body to solve static and dynamic equilibrium problems in 
engineering mechanics.

## Non-Particle Problems

So long as the forces do not all act on a single point, the problem is non-particle.

## Different Equilibriums

For a non-particle problem, it is in equilibrium when:
- `$\sum F_x = 0$`
- `$\sum F_y = 0$`
- `$\sum M = 0$`

These conditions are identical to <doc:6.1-Newtons-First-Law#Equilibrium-of-Concurrent-Forces>, but the 
difference is that we can have moments in non-particle problems.

In a particle problem, `$\sum M = 0$` refers to there being *no moments*, since it is not possible to have
a moment on a particle. In a rigid body problem, `$\sum M = 0$` refers to the *net moment* being zero, 
which means there may be moments acting on the body, but they cancel each other out.

## Applying the Equations for Non-Particle Equilibrium

Basically just follow these steps:
1. Draw the free-body diagram, if one is not provided
2. Identify the unknown forces. Refer to <doc:5-Newtons-Third-Law#Supports> for the forces acting on 
certain types of mechanical supports.
3. For unknown forces that are not on an axis, resolve them into their x and y components
4. Equate the forces in the x and y directions
5. Equate the moments about a point
6. Solve the equations simultaneously to find the unknown forces

If there are a lot of unknown forces from supports (eg. pivots), consider setting one of them as the pivot 
and calculate forces as moments about that point.