# The Straight Line

Straight lines, aka linear functions or linear graphs

## Overview

Most relationships between engineering relationships can be expressed or approximated by a straight 
line, which is the simplest type of function.

- Recognise the equation of a straight line
- Explain the significance of a and b in the equation of a line `f(x) = ax + b`
- Find the gradient of a straight line given two points on the line
- find the equation of a straight line through two points
- find the distance between two points

## Equation of a Straight Line

See <doc:Coordinate-geometry-in-two-dimensions#Straight-Lines> for the exact same content. Note that SST uses "m" for the gradient/slope, where NP uses "b" for parity with the quadratic form.

Lines have two common forms: the slope-intercept form, and the gradient-point form.

Slope-intercept form:
```math
y = bx + c
```

Gradient-point form:
```math
\text{Given a point } (x_1, y_1) \text{ and a gradient } b

y - y_1 = b(x - x_1)
```

Where:
- `$b$` is the slope of the line
- `$c$` is the y-intercept of the line
- `(x_1, y_1)` is a point on the line

There are also two other less common but arguably useful forms of a line:

Point-point form:
```math
\text{Given two points } (x_1, y_1) \text{ and } (x_2, y_2)
\frac{y - y_1}{x - x_1} = \frac{y_2 - y_1}{x_2 - x_1}
```

Intercept-intercept form:
```math
\text{Given two intercepts } (x_1, 0) \text{ and } (0, y_1)
\frac{x}{x_1} + \frac{y}{y_1} = 1
```

### Gradient Directions

A positive gradient slopes up, a negative gradient slopes down. A zero gradient is a horizontal line, 
and an infinite or undefined gradient (usually a result of dividing by x where x = 0) is a vertical line.

### Parallel Lines

Lines are parallel if they have the same slope, ie the same `b` value in the slope-intercept form. Two 
parallel lines have either zero (if they have different y-intercepts) or infinite solutions (if they are 
the same line).

## Uses of Two Points

A line can be defined by two points, and a line can be drawn between any two points.

### Finding the Gradient of a Straight Line

Given two points on the line, `(x_1, y_1)` and `(x_2, y_2)`, the gradient of the line is given by:
```math
b = \frac{y_2 - y_1}{x_2 - x_1}
```

### Finding the Equation of a Straight Line

You can also easily calculate the gradient-point form of a line given two points:
```math
y - y_1 = \frac{y_2 - y_1}{x_2 - x_1}(x - x_1)
```

## Distance between Two Points

Our old friend the Pythagorean theorem can be used to find the distance between two points. Given two points 
`(x_1, y_1)` and `(x_2, y_2)`, the distance `d` between them is given by:
```math
d = \sqrt{(x_2 - x_1)^2 + (y_2 - y_1)^2}
```
This is the same as the length of the hypotenuse of a right-angled triangle with sides `x_2 - x_1` and
`y_2 - y_1`.