# Circles

Basic coordinate geometry of a circle

## Overview

- Obtain the equation of any given circle
- Obtain the centre and radius of a circle from its equation
- Square root weirdness
- Inequalities to do with circles

See <doc:Coordinate-geometry-in-two-dimensions#Circles> for more information.

## Obtaining the equation and attributes of a circle

Given the standard form of a circle:
```math
(x - a)^2 + (y - b)^2 = r^2
```
where:
- `$r$` is the radius of the circle
- `(a, b)` is the centre of the circle

Just substitute in the values.

### Use Cases for the General Form

> Important: DO NOT expand the equation. The standard form is the most useful form of a circle, and the expanded form does not provide _any_ useful information.

The general form of a circle is:
```math
x^2 + y^2 + 2px + 2qy + c = 0
```
where:
- `(a, b)` is the center of the circle
- `$r$` is the radius of the circle
- `$p$` = `-a`
- `$q$` = `-b`
- `$c$` = `a^2 + b^2 - r^2`
- `$r$` = `sqrt(p^2 + q^2 - c)`

The general form can be used to identify which conic intersection is present in a given equation.
| Conic Intersection | Condition |
|-------------------|----------|
| Circle | `x^2` and `y^2` both have the same coefficient |
| Degenerate Circle | Circle conditions, but `c > p^2 + q^2` (ie `r` is complex) |
| Ellipse | ? |
| Parabola | ? |
| Hyperbola | ? |

I will write the conditions for the other conic intersections later, once I get to that chapter.

## On Square Roots

Consider these two equations:
@Row {
    @Column {
        ```math
        x^2 = 4
        x = \pm2
        ```

        In this case, `x` can be either `2` or `-2`.
    }
    @Column {
        ```math
        x = \sqrt{4}
        x = 2
        ```

        In this case, `x` can only be `2`, as the EXPLICIT square root of a number is always positive.
    }
}

Therefore, these two forms - although they look mathematically similar - are very distinct. That is 
also why you cannot solve a quadratic equation by taking the square root of both sides.

## Inequalities to do with circles

If you rearrange the equation of a circle to obtain a function for how far a point (x, y) is from the center:
```math
f(x, y) = (x - a)^2 + (y - b)^2
```
You can then use this function to determine whether a point is inside, outside, or on the circle.
```math
f(x, y) < r^2 \implies \text{inside}
f(x, y) = r^2 \implies \text{on (this is also the standard form)}
f(x, y) > r^2 \implies \text{outside}
```

The area bound between two circles, where one circle is inside the other, is given by:
```math
A = \pi(R^2 - r^2)
```
where:
- `$R$` is the radius of the outer circle
- `$r$` is the radius of the inner circle
