# Conic Sections

Circles, ellipses, parabolas, and hyperbolas are all conic sections. 

## Overview

Ellipses, parabolas, and hyperbolas are all defined as the intersection of a plane with a 
double-napped cone. Circles are considered a special case of ellipses, where the foci (plural for 
focus, aka centers) are equal. Rectangular hyperbolas are a special case of degenerate hyperbolas, 
where the focus is at the origin.

## Ellipses

@Image(source: "Graph_Ellipse", alt: "Ellipse")

This is the standard form of an ellipse. The major difference from <doc:1.2-Circles> are that ellipses have two radii:
- `$a$`, the horizontal radius, is the distance from the center to the rightmost point of the ellipse
- `$b$`, the vertical radius, is the distance from the center to the topmost point of the ellipse

Ellipses are always symmetrical about the x-axis and y-axis, taking its center as the origin. This means that there are no "diagonal" ellipses with this form.

### Standard Form

The standard form of an ellipse is:
```math
\frac{x^2}{a^2} + \frac{y^2}{b^2} = 1
```
where:
- `$a$` is the horizontal radius
- `$b$` is the vertical radius

Note how, if `$a$` is equal to `$b$`, the ellipse is a circle with radius `$a$` (or `$b$`).
```math
\frac{x^2}{a^2} + \frac{y^2}{a^2} = 1

\frac{x^2 + y^2}{a^2} = 1

x^2 + y^2 = a^2
```

The standard form of an ellipse with its center, `$(\alpha, \beta)$` is:
```math
\frac{(x - \alpha)^2}{a^2} + \frac{(y - \beta)^2}{b^2} = 1
```

#### Deriving the Standard Form

Consider two points, A and B, with cartesian coordinates `$(c, 0)$` and `$(-c, 0)$`, respectively. The 
distance from A to B is `$2c$`. A curve has a property such that for any point `$P$` on the curve, the sum 
of the distances from `$P$` to A and B is a constant `$2a$`.

@Image(source: "Graph_Ellipse Derivation", alt: "Ellipse Derivation")

To derive the standard form of an ellipse, we first use the distance formula to mathematically express 
the sum-of-distances property:
```math
|PB|^2 = R_1^2 = y^2 + (x + c)^2
|PA|^2 = R_2^2 = y^2 + (x - c)^2
R_1 + R_2 = 2a \quad \textrm{(1)}
```
where we define PB and PA as `$R_1$` and `$R_2$`, just to refer to them in a simple way. That is simply the 
pythagoras theorem. We then manipulate the equations to obtain the difference of squares of `$R_1$` and `$R_2$`
```math
R_1^2 - R_2^2 = [(x+c)^2 + y^2] - [(x-c)^2 + y^2]
= (x+c)^2 - (x-c)^2
= (x^2 + 2xc + c^2) - (x^2 - 2xc + c^2)
= 4cx \quad \textrm{(2)}
```
Using the difference of squares formula, we can express this as:
```math
R_1^2 - R_2^2 = 4cx = (R_1 + R_2)(R_1 - R_2)
= (2a)(R_1 - R_2)
```
We can hence calculate `$R_1 - R_2$`:
```math
R_1 - R_2 = \frac{R_1^2 - R_2^2}{2a} = \frac{4cx}{2a} = \frac{2cx}{a} \quad \textrm{(3)}
```
Then sum the two equations `(1)` and `(3)` to obtain a value for `$R_1$`:
```math
(R_1 + R_2) + (R_1 - R_2) = 2a + \frac{2cx}{a}
2R_1 = 2a + \frac{2cx}{a}
R_1 = a + \frac{cx}{a}
```
We can use the value of `$R_1$` to obtain an equation
```math
R_1 = a + \frac{cx}{a}
\sqrt{y^2 + (x+c)^2} = a + \frac{cx}{a}
\text{Squaring both sides,}
y^2 + (x+c)^2 = (a + \frac{cx}{a})^2
y^2 + x^2 + c^2 + 2cx = a^2 + \frac{c^2x^2}{a^2} + 2cx
y^2 + x^2 + c^2 = a^2 + \frac{c^2x^2}{a^2}
x^2(1-\frac{c^2}{a^2}) + y^2 = a^2 - c^2
```
And finally simplify to obtain the standard form:
```math
x^2(1-\frac{c^2}{a^2}) + y^2 = a^2 - c^2

x^2(\frac{a^2 - c^2}{a^2}) + y^2 = a^2 - c^2

\frac{x^2}{a^2} + \frac{y^2}{a^2 - c^2} = 1
```
If we define `$b$` to be equal to `$a^2 - c^2$`, we can express the standard form as:
```math
\frac{x^2}{a^2} + \frac{y^2}{b^2} = 1
```
where `$a$` is the horizontal radius, and `$b$` is the vertical radius.

#### Obtaining a Circle from Three Points

See [this graph](https://www.desmos.com/calculator/v9r0dzgj0c), which demonstrates how to obtain a circle 
from three points. The steps are:
1. Define three points, `$P_1$`, `$P_2$`, and `$P_3$`
2. Define two lines, `$L_1$` connecting `$P_1$` and `$P_2$`, and `$L_2$` connecting `$P_2$` and `$P_3$`
3. Define the perpendicular bisector of `$L_1$` and `$L_2$`, `$B_1$` and `$B_2$`
4. Obtain the intersect `$(x_c,y_c)$` of the two lines, which is the center of the circle
5. Obtain the distance `$R$` from the center to one of the points, which is the radius of the circle.
6. Put the center and radius into the standard form of a circle

I'm not bothered to write them out here in latex.

### Axes

If `$a$` is greater than `$b$`, the ellipse is wider than it is tall, and the x-axis is the major axis. If 
`$b$` is greater than `$a$`, the ellipse is taller than it is wide, and the y-axis is the major axis. In 
both cases, the other axis is the minor axis.

| Condition | Major Axis | Minor Axis |
|-----------|------------|------------|
| `$a > b$`   | x-axis     | y-axis     |
| `$b > a$`   | y-axis     | x-axis     |
| `$a = b$`   | neither (circle) | neither (circle) |

Ignore the directrix - we will cover that later.

### Vertices

A circle has *four* vertices, defined as the topmost, bottommost, leftmost, and rightmost points of the ellipse. The vertices are at the following coordinates:
- Topmost: `$(0, b)$`
- Bottommost: `$(0, -b)$`
- Leftmost: `$(-a, 0)$`
- Rightmost: `$(a, 0)$`

### Foci

Foci are the "centers" of an ellipse. They are defined as:
```math
\text{foci} = \begin{cases} (0, \pm ae) & \text{if } a > b \\ (\pm be, 0) & \text{if } b > a \end{cases}
```
where `$e$` is the eccentricity of the ellipse (see next section)

Foci have the following properties: 
- The sum of the distances from any point on the ellipse to the two foci is constant.
- Light rays emitted from one focus will reflect off the ellipse and converge at the other focus.

### Eccentricity

Eccentricity is a measure of how "stretched" an ellipse is. It is defined as:
```math
e^2 = 1 - \begin{cases} \frac{b^2}{a^2} & \text{if } a < b \\ \frac{a^2}{b^2} & \text{if } b < a \end{cases}
```
Basically, its the square root of the ratio of the squares of the radii, where the smaller radius is
the numerator.

## Parabolas

@Image(source: "Graph_Parabola", alt: "Parabola")

Imagine them like the twin of quadratic functions. The equation is:
```math
y^2 = 4ax
```
where `$a$` is the x-coordinate of the focus.

If you want to translate the parabola horizontally, you can use the following equation:
```math
y^2 = 4a(x - \alpha)
```
where `$(a + \alpha, 0)$` is the focus of the parabola.

Light rays parallel to the x-axis will reflect off the parabola and converge at the focus. That is, for point `$P$` on the 
parabola, the angle between the tangent line at `$P$` and the line from `$P$` to the focus is equal to the angle between the tangent 
line at `$P$` and a line from `$P$` parallel to the x-axis.

In a conic section, the plane intersects the cone at the same gradient as the cone. This means that the plane never 
"closes" (like an ellipse), but also doesn't "flip" (like a hyperbola).

The eccentricity of a parabola is defined as 1, and hence is always 1.

A parabola is defined as the set of points in a plane that are equidistant from a point (the focus) and a line (the 
directrix). See [this graph](https://www.desmos.com/calculator/c86hym1uuj) for a visual.

## Hyperbolas

@Image(source: "Graph_Hyperbola", alt: "Hyperbola")

The standard form of a hyperbola is:
```math
\frac{x^2}{a^2} - \frac{y^2}{b^2} = 1
```
where 
- `$a$` is the horizontal distance from the center to the vertices (touching each side of the hyperbola)
- `$b$` is the vertical distance from the center to the vertices (... see the diagram im not describing this)

The foci are located at `$(\pm ae, 0)$`, where `$e$` is the eccentricity of the hyperbola. Note that this is 
identical to the ellipse, since they're basically the same thing.

The diretrices (plural of directrix) are located at
```math
x = \pm \frac{a}{e}
```

Basically, a is how far apart each half of the hyperbola is, and b is how steep the hyperbola is.

If x and y are flipped, the hyperbola is rotated 90 degrees and the foci are vertical.

The eccentricity of a hyperbola is defined as:
```math
e^2 = 1 + \frac{b^2}{a^2}
```
The eccentricity of a hyperbola is always greater than 1, since squared things are always positive.

The following lines are asymptotes of the hyperbola:
```math
y = \pm \frac{b}{a}x
```
Asymptotes are lines that the hyperbola approache as x tends to infinity, but never touches.

Note the _flipped sign_ in the hyperbola's standard form, which also results in a flipped eccentricity formula.

Light emmitted from one focus follow the same path as light emitted from the other focus, but reflected off the hyperbola.

They're apparently not super useful in our course, though marine navigation uses them.

See [this graph](https://www.desmos.com/calculator/znlge8jt3s) for a visual.

## General Conics

The following is the general form of ANY conic section:
```math
Ax^2 + Bxy + Cy^2 + Dx + Ey + F = 0
```
Where A, B, C, D, E, and F are constants.

If A, B, and C are all equal to 0, the equation is a line. If not, the equation is
- an ellipse if `$B^2 - 4AC$ < 0`
    - a circle if `$A = C$`
- a parabola if `$B^2 - 4AC$ = 0`
- a hyperbola if `$B^2 - 4AC$ > 0`