# Trigonometric Functions

Trigo in general conditions, not just in triangles

## Overview

- Express angles in radians
- define trigonometric functions generally
- sketch the graphs of the three main trigonometric functions: `$\sin$`, `$\cos$`, `$\tan$`

## Radians

@Image(source: "Diagram_Radians", alt: "Diagram of Radians")

Radians are a unit for angles, but it is dimensionless (ie. no unit) because it is defined as a ratio. 
The angle in radians is defined as the ratio of the length of the arc to the radius of the circle:
```math
\theta = \frac{\textrm{length of arc AB}}{\textrm{radius}} = \frac{l}{r}
```

One full rotation is `$2\pi$` radians, which is equivalent to `$360^\circ$`. To convert from degrees to 
radians and vice versa, we can use the following formula:
```math
\text{radians} = \text{degrees} \times \frac{\pi}{180}
\text{degrees} = \text{radians} \times \frac{180}{\pi}
```

See <doc:Trig-functions-identities-and-equations#Special-angles> for a table of special angles (angles 
that the trig functions produce for certain inputs) in radians and degrees. Here's a copy:

| θ in deg | 0 | 30 | 45 | 60 | 90 |
|----------|---|----|----|----|----|
| θ in rad | 0 | π/6 | π/4 | π/3 | π/2 |
| sin θ | √0/2 | √1/2 | √2/2 | √3/2 | √4/2 |
| cos θ | √4/2 | √3/2 | √2/2 | √1/2 | √0/2 |
| tan θ | 0 | 1/√3 | 1 | √3 | undefined |

Remember it this way: People sin more and they have less cos (cause) over time.

## General Definitions of Trig Functions

Consider a unit circle (a circle with radius 1) centered at the origin, in a polar coordinate system.

@Image(source: "Graph_Trig Circle Definition", alt: "Graph of Trig Circle Definition")

The value of `$cos(\theta)$` is the x-coordinate of the point on the unit circle at angle `$\theta$`, 
and the value of `$sin(\theta)$` is the y-coordinate of that point. Tangent is just the ratio sin/cos.

In other words:
- `$cos(\theta)$` is the projection of line OR on the positive x-axis
- `$sin(\theta)$` is the projection of line OR on the positive y-axis

You can also use this definition to reason about the sign of a given trig function's output. For example,
- All points in Quadrant 1 (top-right) have positive x and y coordinates, so cos and sin are positive.
- In Quadrant 2 (top-left), x is negative but y is positive, so cos is negative and sin is positive.
- In Quadrant 3 (bottom-left), both x and y are negative, so cos and sin are negative.
- In Quadrant 4 (bottom-right), x is positive and y is negative, so cos is positive and sin is negative.

And the tangent is just the ratio, so it is positive when the signs align (quadrants 1 and 3).

This also shows why trig functions repeat - its just going round the circle again.

## Flipping About an Axis

When you subtract an angle from 180 degrees, you simply flip the line across the y-axis. This would flip 
the x-coordinate (cos) but not the y-coordinate (sin), so:
```math
\sin(180^\circ - \theta) = \sin(\theta)
\cos(180^\circ - \theta) = -\cos(\theta)
```

When you add an angle to 180 degrees, you flip the line across both the x and y axes. This would flip
the x-coordinate (cos) and the y-coordinate (sin), so:
```math
\sin(180^\circ + \theta) = -\sin(\theta)
\cos(180^\circ + \theta) = -\cos(\theta)
\tan(180^\circ + \theta) = \tan(\theta)
```
Tangent stays the same because the inverted signs cancel out.

When you add an angle to 360 degrees or a multiple therof, you just go around the circle again, so:
```math
\sin(360n^\circ + \theta) = \sin(\theta)
\cos(360n^\circ + \theta) = \cos(\theta)
\tan(360n^\circ + \theta) = \tan(\theta)
```

See <doc:Trig-functions-identities-and-equations#Useful-Relationships> for an almost-full list of these 
relationships.

## At Very Small X

When x is very small, `$sin(x) \approx x$` and `$\cos(x) \approx 1$`. I'll try to explain it without 
limits, since I haven't learned that yet.

If you imagine the unit circle again - for an angle of `$\theta$`, the length of the arc is 
`$r\theta$`. Since the radius is 1, the length of the arc is just `$\theta$`.

At small angles, the x component of the arc is practically nonexistent. Therefore, the arc can be 
aproximated as a straight line of length `$\theta$`.

You can imagine the same thing for cosine, except its closer to 1.

## Reciprocal Functions

The reciprocal functions are just the inverse of the original trig functions. They are defined as:
```math
\sec(\theta) = \frac{1}{\cos(\theta)}
\csc(\theta) = \frac{1}{\sin(\theta)}
\cot(\theta) = \frac{1}{\tan(\theta)} = \frac{\cos(\theta)}{\sin(\theta)}
```

For the functions `$\sec$` and `$\csc$`, they have no defined values for y-values within -1 and 1. This 
is because of how reciprocals work - `$1/x$` where `$x > 1$` is a number larger than 1, vice versa for 
negative. Since sine and cosine are always between -1 and 1, the secant and cosecant functions are never 
between -1 and 1.

All of the reciprocal functions have vertical asymptotes at the points where the original functions 
are 0, as it results in division by 0.

## Sketching the Graphs

Just get a few important points, like
- x-intercepts
- y=1
- y=-1

and yolo it from there.