# Series Circuits

Circuits where components are connected end-to-end, forming a single path for current flow.

## Overview

- Calculate the effective resistance of elements and the power dissipated in a series circuit
    - See <doc:Resistors#Effective-Resistance> for more information about effective resistance
    - See <doc:D.C.-Circuits#Series-Circuits> for information about current in series circuits
    - See <doc:Current-of-Electricity#Power> for more information about power
- State Kirchhoff's voltage law and apply it to series circuits (see <doc:Circuit-Theories#Kirchoffs-Voltage-Law>)
- Use the voltage divider rule to find voltages across resistive components in series (see <doc:D.C.-Circuits#Potential-Dividers>)
- Describe the single and double subscript notation for potentials
- Draw the circuit representing a practical voltage source

## How to Identify a Series Circuit

If a component's terminal is connected to (and ONLY to) the terminal of one other component, then the two 
components are in series. Note that in larger circuits, a "component" may be, say, a parallel circuit. The
"component" would then be in series with other components, but other components would not be in series with 
the "component"'s components.

## Power in a Series Circuit

The power dissipated in a series circuit is the sum of the power dissipated in each component. Mathematically,
```math
P = P_1 + P_2 + \ldots + P_n
= \sum_{i=1}^{n} I^2 R_i
```
where 
- `$P$` is the total power
- `$I$` is the current through the circuit (assumed to be the same for all components in series)
- `$P_i$` is the power dissipated in component `$i$`.
- `$R_i$` is the resistance of component `$i$`.

## Kirchhoff's Voltage Law Application

Kirchhoff's voltage law states that the sum of the potential differences across all components in a closed 
loop is equal to 0. A series circuit is a closed loop, so the sum of the potential differences across all 
components in a series circuit is equal to the voltage supplied by the source.

Note about the application of `$V=IR$` to do with KVL: If you have a voltage `$V_{AB}$` from point `$A$` to point `$B$`:
- If current flows from `$A$` to `$B$`, then `$V_{AB}$` is positive (ie `$V_A>V_B$`)
- If current flows from `$B$` to `$A$`, then `$V_{AB}$` is negative (ie `$V_A<V_B$`)

When applyind KVL, you need to be very careful about the signs of the voltages.

## Voltage Notation

A single subscript notation is used to indicate the potential at a point in the circuit. For example, 
`$V_A$` indicates the potential at point `$A$`. 

A double subscript notation is used to indicate the potential difference between two points in the circuit. For example, 
`$V_{AB}$` indicates the potential difference between points `$A$` and `$B$`. It is also defined as:
```math
V_{AB} = V_A - V_B
```
If `$V_{AB}$` is positive, point `$A$` is at a higher potential than point `$B$`.

## Voltage Symbols

A "ground component" represents a 0V potential. All grounds in a circuit are taken to be connected - a 
series circuit where the battery's negative terminal is connected to ground and the component's negative
terminal is connected to ground is equivalent to a series circuit where the battery's negative terminal is
connected to the component's negative terminal.

A battery symbol represents a voltage source. The positive terminal (voltage is usually referred to as `$V_
{CC}$`) of the battery is connected to the longer line of the symbol, and the negative terminal (voltage is 
usually 0) is connected to the shorter line of the symbol. You can imagine it like charge "flowing" from the
longer line to the shorter line.

There is a component known as a "DC voltage source". They are a circle with a "+" and "-" sign inside, so 
its quite obvious which side is which.

An "ideal voltage source" has a constant voltage level, and no resistance. Most batteries are not ideal
because they lose voltage as they discharge, and have a small internal resistance.