# Fundamental C

Why is a programming language?

## Overview

On a high level, there are machine languages and human languages (theres actually something in between, 
but we don't care about assembly right now).

Computers can only understand *machine code*, but it is unproductive for humans to write in it directly. 
Therefore, we use *high level languages* (like C) to write programs, which are then translated into 
machine code by a *compiler*.

See <doc:Program-Development#Programming> for more information on programming languages and compilers.

C is a good language to learn because every other language is based on or inspired by C. C is also quite 
difficult so other languages are easy in comparison.

## Basic Syntax

This is a basic "hello world" program in C:
```c
#include <stdio.h>

void main(void) {
    printf("Hello, world!\n");
}
```

### Comments
Comments are ignored by the compiler. They are used to document code and make it easier to read.
```c
// This is a single-line comment
/* This is a
multi-line comment */
printf("Hello, world!\n"); // This is a comment at the end of a line
```

### Imports
To import libraries, use the `#include` directive. For example, to import the standard input/output 
library,
```c
#include <stdio.h>
```
You can also import individual files - however, most AllyLocal projects are single-file, so you are 
unlikely to need this.
```c
#include "myfile.c" // or "myfile.h"
```

### Functions and Main

Functions in C are the building blocks of programs. The `main` function a special function - it is the 
"entry point" of a C program. A function is defined like this:
```c
returnType function_name(parameters) {
    // function body
}
```
In a function like `main`, which (at this stage) takes no arguments/parameters and returns no value,
we can use `void` as the return type and parameter type:
```c
void main(void) {
    // function body
}
```

`main` cannot be renamed, and there may only be one main function in a program.

### Print, Strings, and Escape Sequences
> Definition: `printf`: Prints a string to the console. It does NOT automatically add a new line at the 
> end, unlike other langages' print functions.

> Definition: string: A sequence of characters. They are defined starting and ending with `"`.

> Definition: escape sequence: A special character that is used to represent a character that cannot be
> represented directly in a string. For example, `\n` represents a new line, and `\"` represents a double
> quote.

We have escape characters for two special cases:
- When a character is used for a dedicated purpose in C strings (eg. `"` or `\`)
- When a character does not have a human-typeable representation (eg. `\n` for new line)

```c
printf("Hello,")
printf(" world!"); // prints "Hello, world!" on a single line

printf("Hello, world!\n"); // prints "Hello, world!" and moves to the next line
printf("Hello, \"world\"!\n"); // prints "Hello, "world"!" and moves to the next line
```

### Symbolic Syntax
- Each line ends with a semicolon `;`
- Curly braces `{}` are used to group statements together
- Parentheses `()` are used to group expressions together
- Square brackets `[]` are used to define arrays

## Convention

C has several conventions which I personally disagree with. The most notable is curly braces: In "normal" C, a main function might look like this:
```c
void main(void) 
{
    if (/* some logic here */)
    {
        printf("It works!\n");
    } else
    {
        printf("It doesn't work!\n");
    }
}
```
Which is, imo, hideous. I prefer to use the following style:
```c
void main(void) {
    if (/* some logic here */) {
        printf("It works!\n");
    } else {
        printf("It doesn't work!\n");
    }
}
```

Some conventions I do agree with:
- Use `camelCase` for variable names and function names
- Use `UPPER_SNAKE_CASE` for constants

Some conventions that NP seems to like, but I'm pondering:
- `void` as return type for `main` (most programs use `int` instead)
- Explicit `void` when a function takes no parameters (most programs omit it in the `()` instead)