# Variables

Variables store data in a program

## Overview

- Explain the concept of variables and assignment operator =
- Use variables and assignment operator
- Solve syntax errors related to assignment operator
- Write simple C program to perform simple arithmetic operation using variables and to display them

## What are variables

Variables store data in a program, which may change during the program execution. They are used to 
hold values that can be referenced and manipulated in a program.

In C, the variable life cycle goes as follows:
1. The variable and its type is declared
2. The variable is assigned a value
3. The variable is used in the program
4. The variable is destroyed when it goes out of scope (eg. when the function/logic branch ends)

For example, in the following code:
```c
int main() {
    int a = 5;
    int b = 10;

    int c = a;
    a = b;
    b = c;
    printf("a: %d, b: %d\n", a, b);
}
```
The variables `a` and `b` are declared as integers, and assigned values of 5 and 10 respectively. The 
variable `c` is used to swap the values of `a` and `b`, demonstrating that variables can be rewritten.

Declaring a variable (and its type) assigns it a memory location. The variable name is a reference to 
the value in that memory location.

### Data Types

Data types define how the data stored in memory is interpreted. The most common data types in C are:
- `int`: Integer numbers
- `float`: Floating point numbers
- `char`: Characters
- `double`: Double precision floating point numbers
- `bool`: Boolean values (true/false)

A varaible defined as an `int`, for example, can only store integer values. If you try to assign a 
floating point number to an `int` variable, it will result in a compile-time error.

### Uninitialized Variables
When a variable is declared but not initialized, it contains a *garbage value*. The bits assigned to the 
variable in memory might contain any value, which is likely to be meaningless. Even if the bit values are zero,
the data type that it is read as may interpret it as a different value.

## Printing

Printing is done using the `printf` function, and outputs a value to the console. The format of the
`printf` function is:
```c
printf("format string", value);
```
The format string contains the text to be printed, and can include format specifiers that are replaced
by the values of the variables. For example, to print an integer value, you can use the `%d` format specifier:
```c
printf("The value of a is: %d\n", a);
```
The `\n` at the end of the string is a newline character, which moves the cursor to the next line after
printing.

The format string may contain multiple format specifiers, and the values will be printed in the order they are
passed to the `printf` function. Passing extra/fewer variables than specified results in a runtime error. For 
example:
```c
printf("The value of a is: %d, and b is: %d\n", a, b); // works
printf("The value of a is: %d, and b is: %d\n", a); // runtime error
printf("The value of a is: %d, and b is: %d\n", a, b, c); // runtime error
```
